
## Reflections on Preference Revelation readings

Readings referenced in this reflection:

* Chen, Y., & Plott, C. R. (1996). The Groves-Ledyard mechanism: An experimental study of institutional design. _Journal of Public Economics_, 59(3), 335–364. https://doi.org/10.1016/0047-2727(95)01506-X
* Groves, T., & Ledyard, J. (1977). Optimal Allocation of Public Goods: A Solution to the “Free Rider” Problem. _Econometrica_, 45(4), 783. https://doi.org/10.2307/1912672
* Ledyard, J. (2009). Voting and Efficient Public Good Mechanisms. (D. A. Wittman & B. R. Weingast, Eds.) (Vol. 1). Oxford University Press. https://doi.org/10.1093/oxfordhb/9780199548477.003.0027
* Polasky, S., Lewis, D. J., Plantinga, A. J., & Nelson, E. (2014). Implementing the optimal provision of ecosystem services. _Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences_, 111(17), 6248–6253. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1404484111

Here the main idea is to investigate potential mechanisms that can elicit preferences about public goods while avoiding the pitfalls of free-riding and situations where the dominant strategy is to be untruthful in reporting preference.  In Groves and Ledyard (1977), the authors first posit two types of governments trying to determine an efficient level of public goods based on the preferences of all the citizens.  In a "naive government" situation, the government treats public goods as if they were private - each consumer is asked about how much he or she wishes to provide (and will be responsible for paying), and then provides the aggregate amount, which is enjoyed by all equally.  However, this obviously results in free riders who claim to want no public good (and thus don't pay) but will enjoy the public good paid for by all others.  This results in an inefficient public good provision (and at the limit, no public good provision).  In a Lindahl government, consumers report their marginal willingness to pay for the public good (as opposed to their total desired amount), and a Lindahl equilibrium is found at which each consumer pays a tax related to the total good at their reported marginal rate.  This government depends critically on truthful reporting to reach that Pareto-efficient level of public goods provision, but this mechanism too suffers from the incentive to under-report willingness to pay - resulting again in an inefficient underprovision.

In both these cases, the consumer's tax is related to their message about their desired level of public good.  The Groves-Ledyard (GL) mechanism cleverly decouples the consumer's message from the tax they are then required to pay - instead their tax is based on reported demand from all other consumers, excluding their own message.  Thus, over- or under-reporting do not benefit them, but rather distort the overall provision, so their dominant strategy is to report an accurate message.

GL is crafted to be Pareto optimal as well - the formula for each consumer's tax includes a term that in aggregate balances out any excess of tax collected; the resulting balanced budget is a necessary condition for Pareto optimality (e.g. if excess funds collected, then someone could be made better off by giving them those funds; if insufficient funds collected, too little public good is created).

GL is proposed as an "Optimal" government with these conditions (among others):

* $y(m) \equiv \sum_i m^i$
* $C^i(m, s) = a^i q \cdot \sum_h m^h + \frac{\gamma}{2} \left[ \frac{I - 1}{I}[m^i - \mu m^{\sim i}]^2 - \sigma(m^{\sim i})^2 \right]$
* (see eqns 4.3 and 4.4 for details)

The Groves and Ledyard (1977) paper concludes with some commentary on literature - particularly on differentiating their mechanism from the Vickery Clarke Groves (VCG) mechanism. One of the main points they make is that the VCG mechanism does not generally result in a balanced budget, so therefore cannot be Pareto efficient.  The GL mechanism results in a balanced budget (and Pareto optimality) for a general equilibrium model in which income effects can be accounted for.

The Chen and Plott (1996) paper takes the GL mechanism, which is essentially a theoretical construct ("Now the example produced by Groves and Ledyard is definitely a paper process.  It exists only on the pages of a journal..."), and creates an experimental framework in which they can test the ability of the mechanism to determine optimal outcomes; in particular they focus on the penalty term $\gamma$, looking at cases where $\gamma = 1$ and $\gamma = 100$.  It seems unsurprising that the higher the penalty term, the more frequently the mechanism chooses the efficient and optimal level of public goods - the higher penalty pushes people toward being more truthful in their messaging.  Interesting, however, is later in the paper when they discuss the limits of this punishment parameter.  If 100 is better than 1, is 1000 better than 100? etc.  With a little mathemagic, they show that as $\gamma \rightarrow \infty$, the performance of the model declines.  So somewhere there is potentially a "best" punishment parameter (though likely varies widely based on context and setup). 

Particularly relevant to my area of interest is the Polasky et al. (2014) paper in which the authors apply a Vickery-Clarke-Groves style of auction to the problem of figuring out a spatially explicit conservation management problem.  "Because the opportunity cost of conservation will almost always depend on landowner characteristics that are privately known, such as landowner skills and preferences, asymmetric information is an important feature of most voluntary conservation programs."  The auction mechanism incentivizes landowners to submit accurate information about their value of their own land; the landowner's bid determines whether her plot will be included in a purchase, but not the price - which is determined by the calculation of the ecosystem services provided by the plot (independent of the bid).  Thus, the bid is effectively decoupled from the payout.

The authors show that such a mechanism can work equally well for both a PES scheme and a development tax scheme.  However, the tax scheme does not require the regulator to pay out a large sum of money but rather uses the tax to disincentivize development on plots with large ecosystem service values, avoiding the budget constraint problem.  However, this depends on the regulator having the property rights to allow them to impose such a tax... I will need to dig into this model a bit further and examine the referenced papers on VCG methods applied to environmental public goods: 

15. Kwerel E (1977) To tell the truth: Imperfect information and optimal pollution control. Rev Econ Stud 44(3):595–601.
16. Dasgupta P, Hammond P, Maskin E (1980) On imperfect information and optimal pollution control. Rev Econ Stud 47(5):857–860.
17. Montero JP (2008) A simple auction mechanism for the optimal allocation of the commons. Am Econ Rev 98(1):496–518.

