
## Reflections on Anticommons and Holdouts readings

Readings referenced in this reflection:

* Buchanan, J. M., & Yoon, Y. J. (2000). Symmetric Tragedies: Commons and Anticommons. _The Journal of Law and Economics_, XLIII, 13.
* Heller, M. A. (1998). The Tragedy of the Anticommons: Property in the Transition from Marx to Markets. _Harvard Law Review_, 111(3), 621. https://doi.org/10.2307/1342203
* Kominers, S. D., & Weyl, E. G. (2011). Concordance Among Holdouts. _SSRN Electronic Journal_. https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.1591466
* Polasky, S., Lewis, D. J., Plantinga, A. J., & Nelson, E. (2014). Implementing the optimal provision of ecosystem services. _Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences_, 111(17), 6248–6253. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1404484111

I started with the Buchanan and Yoon (2000) paper, since it was a little less hefty than Heller's (1998) tome.  This concept of "anticommons" is an interesting callback to the property rights papers from earlier in the course, and their summary is conceptually pretty straightforward - mirroring the more familiar Tragedy of the Commons (TotC).  TotC arises basically because of too little exclusion (or too much access) - the absence of well-defined _and well-enforced_ property rights to exclude those who would otherwise exploit without considering the impacts of their exploitation on the overall public good.  TotC results in overuse or overextraction, beyond the socially optimal amount, and dissipates rents to zero as profits and costs converge.

Tragedy of the Anticommmons (TotA), conversely, occurs when there are too many people with rights to exclude - and access requires obtaining permission from multiple potential excluders.  The Danube River example discussed in class, as well as the parking lot example discussed here and in class, help make the problem reasonably concrete.  And the correlation to the TotC is a nice mirror image: 

> The basic logic is equivalent in the two cases. The inefficiency arises because the separate decision makers, each of whom acts in exercise of assigned rights, impose external diseconomies on others who hold similar rights. In the commons or usage side of the model, persons (or firms) may, by adding a unit of input to the common resource, reduce the productivity of all other inputs and the rents of each person. In the anticommons or exclusion side of the model, persons (or firms) may, by reducing inputs to the common facility (via price), reduce the rents available to others who also exercise potential exclusionrights.

The "Geometric-Algebraic Illustration" in Buchanan and Yoon (2000) is quite clear to follow (and as we walked through it in class).  

The Applications section describes some instances in which this kind of behavior might be observed.  The authors note that Heller (1998) looks at empty buildings in Moscow that are due to the need for any potential user to secure permission from multiple agents each of whom can singlehandedly bar the use.  To jump over to Heller (1998) briefly, even if corruption and confusion were eliminated, such a system can emerge: 

> Instead, those regimes have ratified the expectations of powerful socialist-era stakeholders by making them rights-holders in the new economy. Rights were made alienable in the hope that new owners would trade them to more productive users. In a typical Moscow storefront, one owner may be endowed initially with the right to sell, another to receive sale revenue, and still others to lease, receive lease revenue, occupy, and determine use. Each owner can block the others from using the space as a storefront. No one can set up shop without collecting the consent of all of the other owners.

I think the idea of corruption is an interesting one to follow up, but even disregarding that, Buchanan and Yoon (2000) highlight several other examples - a developer of a new technology prevented from taking advantage of this technology due to a thicket of patents on basic research findings, all of which must be observed; development projects inhibited by the necessity of receiving acquiescence from multiple agencies with overlapping rights to exclude; and similarly with residential housing construction requiring permits from multiple agencies.  

Finally, the authors point out that users and rights-holders may not necessarily be driven by financial incentives, though it is a convenient way to consider the problem.  They provide two examples that seem particularly interesting: rights assigned to agents who cannot or may not desire pecuniary gains, such as environmental agents whose responsibility lies in a mandate to protect the environment and who may deny permission on those grounds; and the "genuine zealot" whose desire to exclude (or use, in a TotC case) may not be convinced by any amount of compensation to allow the use (or exclusion) of a resource.

This leads into the "holdout problem" in which a single property-right holder can put a kibosh on some proposed project either by demanding an unreasonably high compensation or refusing any compensation entirely.  Depending on the situation, the government may invoke Eminent Domain to force a sale by an unwilling rights-holder.  In class we spoke about this with respect to the CA High Speed Rail project; I imagine the Dakota Access Pipeline project is similar.  

It seems like this problem could crop up in other cases such as a trial by jury in which unanimity is required; a single juror can throw things off and result in a mistrial.  In politics, the Senate Hold rule allows a single senator to prevent a bill from reaching the floor for a vote; and even when votes occur, if a vote will be close, the median senator or representative holds extraordinary power to sway the outcome - and the same could be said of a swing voter on the Supreme Court. 

Kominers and Weil (2011) discuss holdout problems and propose a potential solution that seems to echo VCG auctions and includes a pivotal mechanism.  present the problem with respect to Cournot's "collaboration problem" in which Cournot suggested that when many firms hold monopolies over the bits and pieces that go into a composite good, each firm's choices to limit production to drive up prices affects all other firms, eventually leading to inefficient overall production. The authors connect this to free riding described in Samuelson (1954) and Hardin's (1968) Tragedy of the Commons.  They propose a "Concordance Principle" consisting of these elements:

1. Sellers are asked to report their values truthfully and buyers are asked to make the monopsonist-optimal offer to the aggregate seller.
2. The buyer’s offer is accepted when it exceeds the total reported reserve.
3. Each seller has the option to exert no influence in which case the share- scaled-up reserve of all other sellers determines whether a sale occurs. If no seller exerts influence the sale proceeds.
4. Sellers exerting no influence, and lone sellers exerting influence, receive at least their share of the offer if a sale occurs and never pay anything.
5. In order to encourage truthful reporting, sellers exerting influence may be required to pay a Pigouvian tax.

I did not go very far into this paper but the authors use their framework to look at holdout problems in land use; this would be interesting to revisit.  They also refine their basic idea into a few special cases which may again be interesting to revisit when I am looking at specific land-use problems.

Finally, revisiting Polasky et al (2014), the holdout problem is very relevant to the idea of identifying and assembling an optimal collection of land parcels for protection of ecosystem services.  In that case, the holdout problem is less pronounced; assuming that all parcels hold some ecosystem service value, and that most parcels can be bought for some price, any specific landowner who tries to hold out can be circumvented easily by simply purchasing a similar plot from another, more pliable, landowner.

This whole holdout problem seems potentially relevant to the idea of Sense of Place (SoP).  If SoP manifests as a landowner placing a particularly high value on a parcel they own, then they can easily become a holdout.  If SoP manifests as a highly motivated opposition group, e.g. an environmental group opposed to a particular development, they may not have direct property rights but may be able to push for more stringent environmental impact assessments or file lawsuits that effectively create an exclusion that must be cleared before development can go through.  

I wonder if this holdout concept, and potential solutions, can be applied to the idea of Rigs to Reefs: in which oil companies bear a responsibility for removing the SB Channel oil rigs, but the potential to leave them largely in place to enhance biodiversity (and extract an environmental fund concession from the oil companies) could be beneficial for both the environment and the companies.  Apparently such a deal was negotiated in the recent past.  However, a vocal opposition group apparently scuttled the whole plan with demands that the companies adhere to the original contract requiring full removal.  (Perhaps another similar circumstance has been playing out with Mauna Kea observatories and challenges of negotiations with different generations of native Hawaiians there?)
